Precompiles and Keccak256 repricing (#2666)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-2666.md

---
eip: 2666
title: Repricing of precompiles and Keccak256 function
author: Alex Vlasov (@shamatar)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip2666-global-precompiles-repricing-and-many-more-discussion-thread/4332
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-05-22
requires: 1352, 2046, 2565
---

## Simple Summary
This EIP tries to fix the problems with Ethereum precompiles and built-in EVM function:
- EIP-2046 changes a `STATICCALL` cost to precompile and it may be necessary to adjust costs of some precompiles that have taken old large cost (`700` gas) into account 
- Some precompiles are overpriced and their pricing formulas do not reflect the structure of underlying function
- Keccak256 built-in function in EVM has pricing that does not reflect underlying hash function structure

> - Better specify behavior of how gas handled if the precompile call fails (DDoS handling behavior)

Reviewer: Simple summary is akin to an email subject line, forum title, or GitHub PR title.  Just a one sentence description that can be used in conversation like, "EIP 2666... you know, the one that ..."

## Abstract
Costs of many precompiles and built-in functions are invalid at the current state of the clients. This EIP contains a list of changes to the pricing formulas to better reflect underlying computations' structure.

## Motivation
Historic pricing for these functions in EVM does not reflect inner structure of the underlying computations (inner structure of the hash functions).

## Specification

> If `block_number >= X` set the following prices to precompiles and Keccak256 opcode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `block_number >= X` set the gas cost of the following precompiles and Keccak256 opcode:
```

>   - `SHA256` precompile (address `0x02`) should be priced as `10 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 9`
>   - RIPEMD precompile (address `0x03`) should be priced as `6 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 12`
>   - Keccak256 built-in function should be priced as `13 + (len(input)/136 + 1)*15`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SHA256` precompile (address `0x02`) **MUST** have a gas cost of `10 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 9`
  - RIPEMD precompile (address `0x03`) **MUST** have a gas cost of `6 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 12`
  - Keccak256 built-in function **MUST** have a gas cost of `13 + (len(input)/136 + 1)*15`
```

Alternatively, consider formatting this as a list of pairs:
```suggestion
  - SHA256 (precompile 0x02): `10 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 9`
  - RIPEMD (precompile 0x03): `6 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 12`
  - KECCAK256 (0x20): `13 + (len(input)/136 + 1)*15`
```

> This EIP *ideally* requires that `MODEXP` repricing is [implemented](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2565) to also accurately reflect that there is implicit compensation for an old `STATICCALL` cost (pre-2046).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP *ideally* requires that `MODEXP` repricing is [implemented](./eip-2565.md) to also accurately reflect that there is implicit compensation for an old `STATICCALL` cost (pre-2046).
```

Reviewer: Also, all opcodes must be in the form `STATICCALL (0xfa)` the first time they are referenced in the EIP at least (optional for further references).  I think we should do something similar for precompiles as well.

### Detailed summary of repricing approach

This EIP relies on two facts:
- apriori knowledge of the inner strucute of the hash functions

> - benchmarks provided by the client teams for some reasoable range of input lengths for random inputs (random byte strings of a given length)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- benchmarks provided by the client teams for some reasonable range of input lengths for random inputs (random byte strings of a given length)
```
CI won't let this through with spelling errors.  😬

| Geth  |   | 5  | 3  |
| OE  |   | 9  | 4  |
| Besu  |   | 5  | 10  |
| Nethermind  |   | 10  | 5  |

EIP-2666 proposes `A = 9`, `B = 10`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP-2046 - safe.

- RIPEMD precompile

Currently it's `600` gas + `120` gas per `32` byte word. Proposed formula is `A * ((len(input) + 8) / 64 + 1) + B`, with coefficients below

|   |   | A  | B  |
|---|---|---|---|
| Geth  |   | 12  | 6  |
| OE  |   | 8  | 2  |
| Besu  |   | 29  | 16  |
| Nethermind  |   | 10  | 6  |

EIP-2666 proposes `A = 12`, `B = 6`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP-2046 - safe. Besu expects to have performance improvements by the end of the year.

- Keccak256 performance

Currently it's `30` gas + `6` gas per `32` byte word. Proposed formula is `A * (len(input) / 136 + 1) + B`, with coefficients below

|   |   | A  | B  |
|---|---|---|---|
| Geth  |   | 13  | 13  |
| OE  |   | 15  | 2  |
| Besu  |   | 19  | 28  |
| Nethermind  |   | 16  | 3  |

EIP-2666 proposes `A = 15`, `B = 13`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP-2046 - safe. Besu expects to have performance improvements by the end of the year.

> 

Reviewer: All of this should go in the Rationale.  The Specification should *only* contain the specification, not the rationale behind *why* particular values were chosen.  This content is all quite appropriate for Rationale section though.

## Rationale
Cost of functions being executed must accurately reflect real CPU time spent on computations, so benchmarking was performed for current precompiles and Keccak256 function to measure running time versus input parameters. 

## Backwards Compatibility
Precompile repricings has happened in a past and can be considered standard procedure. Gas costs of many contracts is expected to reduce that may break re-entrancy protection measures based on fixed gas costs. In any case, such protection should have never been considered good and final.

## Test Cases

> There are no explicit test cases.

Reviewer: Not an immediate issue, but it feels like there should be at least a handful of example calls and their expected gas costs so that clients can do some basic consensus testing prior to integration testing.

## Implementation

Reference material with raw data can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1aCQnk7prrp3Mbcf011BE5zZnkbc3Iw7QAixn6mLbKS0/edit?usp=sharing).

There is a repository available with inputs for benchmarking and precompiles testing [here](https://github.com/shamatar/bench_precompiles).

Raw Besu [benchmarks](https://gist.github.com/shemnon/0ddba91be501fa23291bdec9107fe99a).

> 

Reviewer: The Implementation section is optional, and should ideally contain either an inline reference implementation or a link to something in `../assets/eip-2666/`.  For tutorials, examples, and other supplementary material a blog article or forum thread is generally a better place for that kind of stuff.

---
eip: 2666
title: Repricing of precompiles and Keccak256 function
author: Alex Vlasov (@shamatar)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip2666-global-precompiles-repricing-and-many-more-discussion-thread/4332
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-05-22
requires: 1352, 2046, 2565
---

## Simple Summary

> This EIP tries to fix the problems with Ethereum precompiles and built-in EVM function:
> - EIP-2046 changes a `STATICCALL` cost to precompile and it may be necessary to adjust costs of some precompiles that have taken old large cost (`700` gas) into account 
> - Some precompiles are overpriced and their pricing formulas to not reflect the structure of underlying function
> - Keccak256 built-in function in EVM has pricing that does not reflect underlying hash function structure
> - Better specify behavior of how gas handled if the precompile call fails (DDoS handling behavior)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change gas price of `BNADD`, `BNMUL`, `SHA256`, `RIPEMD` and `Keccak256`.
```
Simple summary should be very terse, one or two sentences at most, and should cut straight to the heart of this specification with no dilly dallying on the "why" or the "how".

## Abstract

> Costs of many precompiles and built-in functions are invalid at the current state of the clients. This EIP contains a list of changes to the pricing formulas to better reflect underlying computations' structure.

Reviewer: Consider including the list of precompiles/built-ins affected and their new gas prices.  Abstract should ideally be a human friendly version of the specification, and in this case IIUC the specification is just a price change for a few things.

## Motivation

> Motivation is simple: make pricing formulas accurately reflect resources (CPU time) requires to actually perform the called computations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historic pricing for these functions is not in line with their actual costs relative to other operations in the EVM.
```
Current motivation is fine if you want to keep it, but I recommend using a less conversational style and being a bit more to the point.

  - RIPEMD precompile (address `0x03`) was priced as `600` gas plus `120` gas per `32` bytes of input. Now it should be priced as `6 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 12`
  - `BNADD` precompile (address `0x06`) should be repriced from `150` gas to `350` gas
  - `BNMUL` precompile (address `0x07`) should be repriced from `6000` gas to `6300` gas
- Keccak256 built-in function was priced as `30` gas plus `6` gas per `32` bytes of the input. Now it should be priced as `13 + (len(input)/136 + 1)*15`

This EIP ideally requires that `MODEXP` repricing is [implemented](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2565) to also accurately reflect that there is implicit compensation for an old `STATICCALL` cost (pre-2046).

### Benchmarks on the most popular clients

Necessary benchmarks for EIP 2666 were provided by the clients and raw form is assembled in [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1aCQnk7prrp3Mbcf011BE5zZnkbc3Iw7QAixn6mLbKS0/edit?usp=sharing)

Short summary:
- BNADD

| |   | Gas |
|---| ---|---|
Geth |   | 350
OE |   | 225

> Besu |   | 165
> Nethermind |   | 120
> 
> BNADD cost will need to be adjusted when EIP 2046 is accepted
> 
> - BNMUL
> 
> | |   | Gas |
> |---| ---|---|
> Geth |   | 3000
> OE |   | 6250
> Besu |   | 19109
> Nethermind |   | 5250
> 
> Besu result is surprising and is not taken into account. Only little repricing will be necessary when EIP 2046 is accepted
> 
> - SHA256 precompile
> 
> Currently it's 60 gas + 12 gas per 32 byte word. Proposed formula is `A * ((len(input) + 8) / 64 + 1) + B`, with coefficients below
> 
> |   |   | A  | B  |
> |---|---|---|---|
> | Geth  |   | 5  | 3  |
> | OE  |   | 9  | 4  |
> | Besu  |   | 5  | 10  |
> | Nethermind  |   | 10  | 5  |
> 
> EIP 2666 proposes `A = 9`, `B = 10`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP 2046 - safe.
> 
> - RIPEMD precompile
> 
> Currently it's 600 gas + 120 gas per 32 byte word. Proposed formula is `A * ((len(input) + 8) / 64 + 1) + B`, with coefficients below
> 
> |   |   | A  | B  |
> |---|---|---|---|
> | Geth  |   | 12  | 6  |
> | OE  |   | 8  | 2  |
> | Besu  |   | 29  | 16  |
> | Nethermind  |   | 10  | 6  |
> 
> EIP 2666 proposes `A = 12`, `B = 6`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP 2046 - safe. Besu expects to have performance improvements by the end of the year.
> 
> - Keccak256 performance
> 
> Currently it's 30 gas + 6 gas per 32 byte word. Proposed formula is `A * (len(input) / 136 + 1) + B`, with coefficients below
> 
> |   |   | A  | B  |
> |---|---|---|---|
> | Geth  |   | 13  | 13  |
> | OE  |   | 15  | 2  |
> | Besu  |   | 19  | 28  |
> | Nethermind  |   | 16  | 3  |
> 
> EIP 2666 proposes `A = 15`, `B = 13`. There are no large one-off costs in this precompile, so it's EIP 2046 - safe. Besu expects to have performance improvements by the end of the year.
> 
> ### Inclusion plan
> 
> EIP 2046 can not be accepted without at least part of the repricings from this EIP (namely for `BNADD` and `BNMUL`). Even though work necessary to activate this EIP is very small (adjust few constants), one can also consider two step plan that can be implemented as the following:
> - Include EIP 2046 and `BNADD`/`BNMUL` repricings
> - Include repricings for `SHA256`, `RIPEMD` and `Keccak256`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER, `SHA256` precompile (address `0x02`) will costs `10 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 9` gas.
As of FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER, `RIPEMD` precompile (address `0x03`) will cost `6 + ((len(input) + 8)/64 + 1) * 12` gas.
As of FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER, `BNADD` precompile (address `0x06`) will cost `350` gas.
As of FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER, `BNMUL` precompile (address `0x07`) will cost `6300` gas.
As of FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER,  `SHA3` (`0x20`) will cost `13 + (len(input)/136 + 1)*15` gas.
```
Specification section should focus entirely on the specification, and not discuss rationale, motivation, inclusion process, etc.  Someone trying to build a client should be able to read the specification and get exactly what they need without having to dig through a bunch of other information.

A lot of the information included in this section is valuable, but it should be moved to the Rationale section, which describes *why* you chose the values you did.  The specification section just asserts the values.  As far as the historic values, this isn't particularly relevant to the specification itself so I would include them in either the motivation section or just remove that data all together (someone who wants that information can find it if they need to by looking at old specifications or the yellow paper.
